welcome to topcast and to my next
episode in my discussion of the fabric
of Reality by David Deutsch we're up to
chapter 8 titled the significance of
life and this chapter is phenomenal to
read if you're one of those people who
read the beginning of infinity first
because coming back to this earlier work
remember the fabric of reality 1997 the
beginning of infinity some decade later
many people have read the beginning of
infinity and found the ideas absolutely
breathtakingly new and they are however
they had antecedents back in the fabric
of reality this chapter perhaps more
than most has it all laid out there on
the significance of not merely life but
in particular people and the way in
which we can change the cosmos it's all
there why wasn't it noticed back then
well it was of course by some people who
happen to be reading the book at that
time but now these ideas are really
beginning to take off the idea being
that life is not some parochial chemical
scum this idea that Stephen Hawking
amongst others promotes it what did he
say something to the effect of we are
but a chemical scum covering the Earth
which is just one among a few planets in
a solar system one among many in the
Galaxy a Galaxy which is one among many
trillions as we know now throughout the
entire universe so we're not that
significant chemical scum as David likes
to point out this is literally true but
it misses the point because there's
something special about this set of
chemicals this set of chemicals that we
call life and in particular this set of
chemicals that is living and becomes a
person able to explain the rest of
physical reality there are two questions
really being explored in this chapter so
far as I can tell one is what is the
nature of Life what is this stuff called
life to begin begin with and two what's
the significance of it is it fundamental
given that it emerges from the motion of
atoms basically how can it be a
fundamental feature of the universe well
I've already given you one hint but
let's see what David has to say here in
the fabric of reality if we want to
understand the fabric of reality after
all the deepest ideas we need to
understand life well do we yes we do
okay so let's see what David has to say
about this he begins the chapter with
quote from ancient times until about the
19th century it was taken for granted
that some special animating force or
factor was required to make the matter
in living organisms behave so noticeably
different from other matter this would
mean in effect that there were two types
of matter in the universe animate matter
and inanimate matter with fundamentally
different physical properties consider a
living organism such as a bear a
photograph of a bear resembles the
living bear in some respects so do other
inanimate objects such as a dead bear or
even in a very limited fashion the great
bare constellation but only animate Mata
can chase you through the forest as you
dodge around trees and catch you and
tear you apart inanimate things never do
anything as purposeful as that also the
Ancients thought they had of course
never seen a guided missile end quote
all these days a Boston Dynamics robot
some people are terrified by of course
1997 was a time just before the
catastrophists when it came to
artificial intelligence really gained
ascendancy and they're around us now it
is the Zeitgeist it is what we are
swimming in among public intellectuals
that these robots are a sign of the end
times people are terrified of them
they're definitely going to become
Terminators so we're told or something
like that we have to really control them
so certainly these things are animated
these Boston Dynamics robots what people
can do with robotics today is absolutely
phenomenal you know they can they can
dance and they can jump they can they're
basically as good as people now you know
you knock them over and they get back up
again some people actually have an
emotional reaction to seeing a robot
being pushed over as if the robot can
actually suffer or has suffered some
indignity of being pushed over it's just
a machine it's like knocking your
toaster over it's not feeling anything
it's not thinking anything it can't
explain it's not going to suffer it
doesn't have the relevant senses and
relevant ideas is doesn't have any ideas
except perhaps the ideas of the
programmer which are still the
programmer's ideas not its ideas it's
just following instructions that aside
the thing isn't living but why isn't it
living is it not living because it
doesn't have Elan vital it doesn't have
the living Essence coursing through it
is that what we have and everything
between us and simple cells have well
let's read on David Wright's quote to
Aristotle and other ancient philosophers
the most conspicuous feature of animate
Mata was its ability to initiate motion
they thought that when inanimate matter
such as a rock has come to rest it never
moves again unless something kicks it
but animate matter such as a hibernating
bear can be at rest and then begin to
move without being kicked with the
benefit of modern science we can easily
pick holes in these generalizations and
the Very idea of initiating motion now
seems misconceived we know that the bear
wakes up because of electrochemical
processes in its body these may be
initiated by external kicks such as
rising temperature or by an internal
biological clock which uses slow
chemical reactions to keep time chemical
reactions are nothing more than the
motion of atoms so the bear never is
entirely at rest on the other hand a
uranium nucleus which is certainly not
alive May remain unchanged for billions
of years and then without any stimulus
at all suddenly and violently
disintegrate so the nominal content of
Aristotle's idea is worthless today but
he did get one important thing right
which was most modern thinkers have got
wrong in trying to associate life with a
basic physical concept albeit the wrong
one motion he recognized that life is a
fundamental phenomenon of nature end
quote and I wonder anyway you know if
it's about initiating motion how
Aristotle went about explaining
something like the melting of ice let's
say maybe you didn't see much in ancient
Greece but
but presumably you know one moment the
ice is solid not moving anything
anywhere and the next minute it's
flowing okay so this is the the
beginning of motion something as mundane
as that but he was trying of course
Aristotle was a genius no one else had
any better ideas at the time you've got
to start somewhere and so hey good as
anything else but of course then you've
got trees and trees aren't initiating
motion or are they I suppose they're
growing and Aristotle is of course said
there life is a fundamental phenomenon
of nature well what do we mean by
fundamental let's see what David has to
say because he goes on to explain this
it's a crucial idea this explain to us
here in the fabric of reality it comes
up again in the beginning of infinity
and it is still an idea that doesn't
seem to have caught on universally well
nothing's going to catch on universally
but it hasn't caught on in mainstream
Academia so far as I can tell let's read
what David says here quote a phenomenon
is fundamental if efficiently deep
understanding of the world depends on
understanding that phenomenon opinions
differ of course about what aspects of
the world are worth understanding and
consequently about what is deep or
fundamental some would say that love is
the most fundamental phenomenon in the
world others believe that when one has
learned certain sacred texts by heart
one understands everything that is worth
understanding the understanding that I
am talking about is expressed in laws of
physics and in principles of logic and
philosophy a deeper understanding is one
that has more generality incorporates
more connections between superficially
diverse truths explains more with fewer
unexplained assumptions the most
fundamental phenomena are implicated in
the explanation of many other phenomena
but are themselves explained only by
basic laws and principles end quote so
this is the idea that what fundamental
means is explains a lot more than other
things the deeper you are the more
things you touch the thing about physics
and why many of us are interested in
physics as being fundamental is because
when things change in our understanding
of the laws of physics then things like
our understanding of how Stars might
work can change how planetary formation
might change our ideas about geophysics
could change some of our ideas about
physical chemistry might change our
ideas about computation change some
aspects of mathematics might need to be
invented and altered by this all of
these areas are in some way touched
biophysics it's got this totalitarian
character where it comes to encapsulate
other areas and by that I mean well once
cosmology was thought to be a domain of
religion and Theology and spirituality
and metaphysics and something Beyond
physics but now of course we know
there's Precision cosmology you can make
measurements and you can have theories
that can be tested by observations it is
really becoming a part of physics
physics begins to incorporate this
physics begins to incorporate even
discussions of biology you have
biophysics and you have constraints
placed upon what we know life can do are
given what goes on in physics this is
why the theories of physics the laws of
physics are fundamental they're deep but
then you can talk about not necessarily
just physical ideas you can talk about
moral ideas or economic ideas or let's
say we talk about a liberalism you know
just this idea that people should be
allowed to speak freely okay this
concept of free speech now why well you
want to have free speech so you can
freely exchange ideas so you can be more
creative why should you want that so you
can increase the wealth between people
so they can sell new widgets and so on
and so forth you can't create new stuff
if you can't transmit new ideas you
can't Advance politically and
technologically and scientifically
without this deep fundamental idea of
the freedom of speech freedom of speech
is a fundamental idea it touches lots of
other areas it has an impact on politics
and on science and on the growth of
Technology on progress more broadly and
so this is why we say this idea is
fundamental as well so something like
that has a fundamental effect on many
areas it has a large Effect one might
say politically on Nations but do all
fundamental ideas fundamental concepts
fundamental phenomena have to have huge
effects on things not necessarily as
David says quote not all fundamental
phenomena have large physical effects
gravitation does and is indeed a
fundamental phenomenon but the Direct
effects of quantum interference such as
the shadow patterns described in Chapter
2 are not large it is quite hard to even
detect them unambiguously nevertheless
we have seen that Quantum interference
is a fundamental phenomenon only by
understanding it can we understand the
basic fact about physical reality namely
the existence of parallel universes end
quote now of course today David has been
the one to say and to explain to us that
the Multiverse is more than just
parallel universes and the universes
aren't strictly parallel anyway there
are approximately parallel they emerge
from more fundamental things themselves
ideas about information and the fungible
nature of or physical object that are
within these universes universes are
classical and emergent there are
approximations to well the truly
fundamental thing which is the
multifirst just physical reality as it
is but let's not get sidetracked we're
talking about life here today and David
goes on to talk about the misconceptions
that Aristotle had and interesting as
they were I'm going to skip over that
and come to where David is explaining
the different conceptions people have
about what counts as being fundamental
he talks about how Darwin's theory of
evolution well it began to explain life
but it's not like it invoked any special
kind of physics it didn't say that there
was this new physical law that applied
to living things to animate them and not
to other stuff but what did happen in
the history of science is that well
Newtonian physics was just so successful
that well as David said it made
reductionism attractive and so he
explains this and so let's read what he
says about this quote since faith in
revealed truth had been found to be
incompatible with rationality which
requires an openness to criticism many
people nevertheless yearned for an
ultimate Foundation to things in which
they could believe if they did not yet
have a reductive Theory of Everything to
believe in then at least they aspired to
one it was taken for granted that a
reductionist hierarchy of Sciences based
on subatomic physics was integral to the
scientific worldview and so it was
criticized only by pseudoscientists and
others who rebelled against science
itself thus by the time I learned
biology in school the status of that
subject had changed to the opposite of
what Aristotle thought was obvious life
was not considered to be fundamental at
all the very term nature study meaning
biology had become an anachronism
fundamentally nature was physics I am
oversimplifying only a little if I
characterize the prevailing view as
follows physics had an offshoot
chemistry which studied the interactions
of atoms chemistry had an offshoot
organic chemistry which studied the
properties of compounds of the element
carbon organic chemistry in turn had an
offshoot biology which studied the
chemical processes we call Life only
because we happen to be such a process
was this remote offshoot of a
fundamental subject interesting to us
physics in contrast was regarded as
self-evidently important in its own
right because the entire universe life
included conforms to its principles end
quote okay so this is common knowledge
in a way this is a running joke in fact
there is even an
XKCD cartoon it was quite famous I'll
put it up on the screen and it has the
whole you know sequence laid out there
the whole hierarchy of science if you
like on the far left for anyone who I
can't say the screen you don't need to
on the far left we have sociologists and
then moving further right we have the
psychologist saying sociology is just
applied psychology and then moving
further right we have a biologist who's
saying psychology has just Applied
Biology moving further right we have the
chemists saying biology has just applied
chemistry and moving further right we
have physicists saying which is just
applied physics it's nice to be on top
and then all the way over to the far
right as a mathematician who is saying
oh hey I didn't see you guys all the way
over there and what's on the x-axis so
to speak is the label Fields arranged by
Purity more pure As you move to the
right so mathematics is the most pure or
the most fundamental this is the way it
was certainly taught to me it must have
been taught to me because I was quite
proud at school of being into physics
and those biology students well they
were just doing emergent stuff it wasn't
as deep it wasn't as interesting there
were too many facts to remember physics
had simple principles the Curious Thing
was there when I was at school as a high
school student we didn't even learn
evolution by natural selection we just
learned what David's about to go through
characteristics of living things and how
the taxonomy worked how you classified
things so and I can still remember it to
this day kingdom phylum class order
family genus species and outside of what
a useless bit of information that's
still floating around in my head I
learned that in like year seven or
something but they didn't teach me the
theory of evolution went after this
election I had to wait until I was a an
older teenager before I figured out any
of that stuff in fact I don't think I
even was taught it at school these days
certainly it is taught at school but I
don't think I was taught it at school so
this is you know sort of in the 90s but
certainly I was taught the idea that
physics is fundamental and you know all
of chemistry is based on physics and
biology just arises out of chemistry and
and so on it goes you know psychology is
just some sort of biology parochial kind
of biology about people so this is there
in our culture it's still there in our
culture I would say and David goes on to
write and I had the same experience
he writes quote my classmates and I had
to learn by heart a number of
characteristics of living things these
were merely descriptive they made little
reference to fundamental concepts
admittedly Locomotion was one of them an
ill-defined echo of the Aristotelian
idea but respiration and excretion were
among them as well there was also
reproduction growth and the memorably
named irritability which meant that if
you kick it it kicks back what these
supposed characteristics of life lack in
elegance and profundity they do not make
up for inaccuracy as Dr Johnson would
tell us every real object is irritable
on the other hand viruses do not respire
grow excrete or move unless kicked but
they are alive and sterile human beings
do not reproduce yet they are alive too
end quote as a teacher of this stuff
once upon a time I can tell you that
well yes there are acronyms for this
kind of thing now I wasn't a biology
teacher but you know you teach High
School science and sometimes this stuff
crops up and the acronym which I never
remembered but it's still call today I
can guarantee that certainly in
Australian schools well actually around
the world because I have some experience
with other curriculum and the acronym is
Mrs Gren and Mrs Grand stands for
movement respiration sensitivity growth
reproduction excretion and nutrition
these are the so-called seven principles
of Life seven characteristics of life
but I should add a rider to this
although I was taught this also back you
know around about year seven around
about the age of 13 12 13 something like
that today in schools okay my most
recent schools that I taught in they did
add to this Evolution and replication
they do add to this they concentrate on
the more fundamental feature of what
life is and they do talk about DNA and
they even you know once you get to like
year 10 or something like that it's
transcription and replication they get
into the genes and stuff like that which
is not what I had it's not what I had in
year 10. I think if I had have chosen to
do biology in year 11 and 12 they would
have taught me this sort of stuff but I
had to wait basically until when I took
subjects at University level before I
understood this because taking chemistry
and physics in the higher levels of high
school they're completely passed me by I
didn't learn about the basics of DNA
even I knew DNA existed but I couldn't
have told you how any of it worked so to
speak but I too could have recited the
characteristics of life so-called
characteristics of life as David goes on
to say quote the reason why both
Aristotle's View and that of my school
textbooks failed to capture even a good
taxonomic description between living and
non-living things let alone anything
deeper is that they both missed the
point about what living things are a
mistake more forgivable in Aristotle
because in his day no one knew any
better Modern Biology does not try to
Define Life by some characteristic
physical attribute or substance some
living Essence with which only animate
matter is in doubt we no longer expect
there to be any such Essence because we
now know that animate matter in the form
of living organisms is not the basis of
life it is merely one of the effects of
life and the basis of life is molecular
it is the fact that there exist
molecules which cause certain
environments to make copies of those
molecules such molecules are called
replicators more generally a replicator
is any entity that causes certain
environments to copy it not all
replicators are biological and not all
replicators are molecules for example a
self-copy and computer program such as a
computer virus is a replicator a good
joke is another replicator for it causes
its listeners to retell it to further
listeners Richard Dawkins has coined the
term meme rhyming with cream for
replicators that are human ideas such as
jokes but all life on Earth is based on
replicators that are molecules these are
called genes and biology is the study of
the origin structure and operation of
genes and there are effects on other
matter in most organisms a gene consists
of a sequence of smaller molecules of
which there are four different kinds
joined together in a chain the names of
the component molecules adenine cytosine
guanine and thymine are usually
shortened to a c g and T the abbreviated
chemical name for a chain of any number
of ACG and T molecules in any order is
DNA genes are in effect computer
programs expressed as sequences of a c g
and T in a standard language called the
genetic code which with very slight
variations is common to all life on
Earth some viruses are based on a
related type of molecule RNA or prions
are in a sense self-replicating protein
molecules end quote and David goes on to
explain some features of genes and I
think listeners are relatively familiar
with this idea that DNA consists of this
sequence of genes it also consists of
so-called junk DNA as well but the
genome is the set of all the genes which
code for the building of a particular
organism this is what the genome is
David goes on to explain after I'm going
to skip a little here and he says quote
a gene can function as a replicator only
in certain environments by analogy with
an ecological niche the set of
environments in which an organism can
survive and reproduce I shall also use
the term Niche for the set of all
possible environments which a given
replicator would cause to make copies of
it the niche or niche of an insulin Gene
includes environments where the gene is
located in the nucleus of a cell in the
company of certain other genes and the
cell itself is appropriately located
within a functioning organism in a
habitat suitable for sustaining the
organism's life and reproduction but
there are also other environments such
as biotechnology Laboratories in which
bacteria are genetically altered so as
to incorporate the gene those
environments are also part of the Gene's
niche as are an Infinity of other
possible environments that are very
different from those in which the Jane
evolved end quote now David makes some
remarks which I'm going to skip over
about how genes are very finely tuned so
to speak carefully adapted to their
niches variations of the gene even
slight variations will cause them not to
get copied in such a way as to enable
the organism to thrive it will cause the
death of the organism or certainly some
severe problem anyway in other words the
gene is adapted to a niche a replicator
is adapted to a niche and if the
replicator changes if the gene changes
even slightly it's no longer adapted to
that particular thing and so the
organism that has that variance is not
going to be as successful if it still
occupies that same environment generally
speaking but obviously this kind of
implies that there are degrees of
adaptation so you can be more or less
adapted this is how variation among
species happens and therefore you can
have differential selection of members
of a particular species and therefore
Evolution over time I'm skipping over a
fair bit here and I'm coming up to a
part where we get a little hint of
Constructor Theory just perhaps just
perhaps so I'll pick it up where David
says quote if most variants of the
replicator fail to cause most
environments of its Niche to copy them
then it would follow that our
replicators form is a significant cause
of its own copying in that Niche which
is what we mean by saying that it is
highly adapted to the niche or Niche on
the other hand if most variants of the
replicator would be copied in most of
the environments of the niche then our
form of our replicator makes little
difference in that copying would occur
anyway in that case our replicator makes
little causal contribution to its
copying and is not highly adapted to
that Niche so the degree of adaptation
of a replicator depends not only on what
that replicator does in its actual
environment but also on what a vast
number of other objects most of which do
not exist would do in a vast number of
environments other than the actual one
we've encountered this curious sort of
property before the accuracy of a
virtual reality rendering depends not
only on the responses the machine
actually makes to what the user actually
does but also on responses it does not
in the event make two things the user
does not in fact do this similarity
between living processes and virtual
reality is no coincidence As I Shall
explain shortly end quote let's just
remember the significance of this idea
of virtual reality people like to talk
about things like the simulation
argument or just a more prosaic claim
that we might be living in a computer in
some way shape or form the simulation
argument being the superset of that it's
a simulation inside a simulation inside
a simulation side of simulation as if
this is somehow explanatory of our
circumstance of course it's not if we
found we're in a simulation we'd want to
find out at what kind of universe the
simulation was operating in or the
entire set of simulations what base
reality was like so to speak all of that
aside we are already occupying virtual
reality given that the simulation
hypothesis is false on the basis that
it's a bad explanation easily variable
and so on if we just assume normal
realism obtains in other words physical
reality is out there and we interact
with physical reality and come to
understand physical reality through our
explanations which we devise to explain
our observations we occupy virtual
reality because we're minds and the
minds have only access to physical
reality out there beyond your mind via
channels of information your mind is
incomplete Darkness it's in your skull
operating on your brain there's no light
there what's being received is
information via optic nerves via
auditory nerves via the nerves of
sensations of other senses and it's
being interpreted so you are already a
computer program of a Kind modeling the
rest of physical reality it's a virtual
reality rendering is what you're
experiencing of reality our explanations
themselves our scientific explanations
are virtual reality of a kind they are
modeling reality that's out there giving
you a more or less accurate picture of
what is really going on and when I say
picture I just don't mean superficial
image it does have that as David
deutsches but more importantly the
mathematical relationships that are
involved in explaining something when
you write down the explanation in full
as far as we understand it that is a
form of virtual reality it's not reality
itself it's a model of the reality that
we think is going on out there we know
what's going on I should say these for
me are synonymous so what's this got to
do with life well let's see what David
goes on to say after some more remarks
about genes and niches and by the way my
pronunciation of Niche or Niche or Niche
how would you like to do it in Australia
we tend to say Niche and I hear others
people say Niche so I just get over it
so I guess for The Listener you're just
gonna have to put up with me switching
between these different pronunciations
sometimes I've got the way I speak in
mind and sometimes I think to myself ah
what are those British and Americans say
so let's persevere David goes on to say
quote the most important factor
determining a Gene's Niche is usually
that the Gene's replication depends on
the presence of other genes for example
the replication of a bear's insulin Gene
depends not only on the presence in the
Bear's body of all its other genes but
also on the presence in the external
environment of genes from other
organisms Bears cannot survive without
food and the genes for manufacturing
that food exist only in other organ
organisms different types of genes which
need each other's cooperation to
replicate often live together in Long
DNA chains the DNA of an organism an
organism is the sort of thing such as an
animal plant or microbe which in
everyday terms we usually think of as
being alive but it follows from what I
have said that alive is at best a
courtesy title when applied to the parts
of an organism other than its DNA an
organism is not a replicator it is part
of the environment of replicators
usually the most important part after
the other genes the remainder of the
environment is the type of habitat that
can be occupied by the organism such as
mountain tops or ocean bottoms and the
particular lifestyle within that habitat
such as hunter or filter feeder which
enables the organism to survive for long
enough for its genes to be replicated in
everyday parlance we speak of organisms
reproducing them themselves indeed this
was one of the supposed characteristics
of living things in other words we think
of organisms as replicators but this is
inaccurate organisms are not copied
during reproduction far less do they
cause their own copying they are
constructed afresh according to the
blueprints embodied in the parent
organism's DNA end quote this is clearly
obvious when we look at just human
beings you are not an identical copy of
your mother and your father you receive
fifty percent of your genetic material
from your father and 50 from your mother
and it is a random 50 it's not like it's
the same 50 because you look different
to your brothers and sisters obviously
and so the selection which fifty percent
you get from your father and which you
get from your mother is anyone's guess
so we are not direct copies we have not
been replicated reproduction is not
replication replication means copying
and what's the only thing being copied
some of the genes okay so some random
fifty percent of genes from your father
is being copied into your DNA and the
reason why you look different if you're
a male and you have a brother from your
brothers is because it's a different 50
percent of the father's DNA that gets
copied into you as David goes on to say
having just said organisms are not
copied quote for example if the shape of
a bear's nose is altered in an accident
it may change the lifestyle of that
particular bear and the Bear's chances
of surviving to reproduce itself may be
affected for better or worse but the
bear with the new shape of nose has no
chance of being copied if it does have
Offspring they will have noses of the
original shape but make a change in the
corresponding Gene if you do it just
after the beer is conceived you need
only change one molecule and any
Offspring will not only have noses of
the new shape but copies of the new Gene
as well this shows that the shape of
each nose is caused by that Gene and not
by the shape of any previous nose so the
shape of the Bear's nose makes no the
cause of contribution to the shape of
the offspring's nose but the shape of
the Bear's genes contribute both to
their own copying and to the shape of
the Bear's nose and of its offspring's
nose end quote so we'll just add a
little bit of jargon here for anyone
who's interested the contingent of genes
that you have in your DNA is known as
The genome that is the set of all the
genes that you have how they are then
expressed what it goes on to look like
as the physical organism that you are is
called the phenotype so we've got
genotype the set of all the genes in the
DNA and how it's expressed in the
environment what it looks like that's
the phenotype and Dawkins wrote the book
called the extended phenotype to explain
how the genotype can have effects on the
environment and so for example the genes
for birds nests are really in the Genome
of the bird okay because everything the
bird does all the behaviors that the
bird engages in are somehow encoded in
in the DNA precisely how we don't know
exactly but they must be in there
including the things that aren't just in
the bird's body the nest of a bird is
not in the bird's body but it must be
there in the DNA in some way shape or
form now we are a bit different not all
of our manifestations in the physical
environment are there encoded in the DNA
not by a long shot we have something
special about our genome something in
our genome codes for a universal
explainer allowing us to create
explanations understand the world and
bring new knowledge into existence so
this is a unique feature of our genome
therefore our extended phenotype if you
like is a rather strange Beast possibly
the wrong word there it's a strange
phenomena
or whatever the case when we're talking
about bears here in Bears noses the gene
on the genome can be changed that's a
change in the genome and then when the
shape of the Bear's nose actually
changes that's the change in the
phenotype and David goes on to say quote
so an organism is the immediate
environment which copies the real
replicators the organism's genes
traditionally a bear's nose and its den
would have been classified as living and
non-living entities respectively but
that distinction is not rooted in any
significant difference the role of the
Bear's nose is fundamentally no
different from that of its den neither
is a replicator though new instances of
them are continually being made both the
nose and the den are merely part of the
environment which the Bear's genes
manipulate in the course of getting
themselves replicated and quote you may
feel a little uncomfortable with that if
you're coming at this for the first time
this idea that organisms including you
are in some sense just an environment
you are just the environment in which
the genes facilitate their own
replication this is the existence of
your body as so that these genes can get
copied they're competing to be copied
that's what you are as a matter of Life
As a matter of life now does this
undermine your significance as a living
thing not at all because people are not
merely their genes people are minds and
people can create explanatory knowledge
this is what makes us cosmically
significant now David will come to this
but just to flag it up ahead so just in
case you're feeling as if well you're
dismissing the existence of people by
saying they're nothing but the
environments in which genes are copied
well humans are different as we like to
say but let's get going David goes on to
say quote this gene-based understanding
of Life regarding organisms as part of
the environment of genes has implicitly
been the basis of biology since Darwin
but it was overlooked until at least the
1960s and not fully understood until
Richard Dawkins published The Selfish
Gene in 1976 and the extended phenotype
in 1982 end quote yes and I couldn't
agree more these are groundbreaking
works again I'd like to go back
sometimes and just recall my University
days where as I say when I'm talking
about philosophy on this channel I was
force-fed lots and lots of Wittgenstein
and the the classics but no one really
taught me Papa was maybe one or two
readings here and there it wasn't a
central Focus even of a philosophy of
science programmed we just didn't get
much of it at all I also happened to do
a subject that was the philosophy of
biology and it was a fascinating subject
it was very interesting it went all the
way through the history of some of this
stuff all the way from the Aristotelian
ideas through to the modern day but when
we did get to the modern day the big guy
the guy that we read lots and lots of
was Stephen J Gould we read lots of
Stephen J Gould and the lecturer the
professor that was in charge of the
course at the time was fascinated by his
ideas now Gould from what I remember I
haven't really read much since
University from Gould but he was a
proponent of species selection not the
selfish Gene idea these were competing
ideas Richard Dawkins versus Stephen J
Gould that was a big debate that went on
interestingly Stephen J Gould was
actually against the use of evolution to
explain psychology in other words
evolutionary psychology he was against
the whole idea but his ideas were
certainly quite interesting but I
mentioned this because again it's
another of those cases where I was
force-fed his stuff but I wasn't taught
much at all about what Richard Dawkins
had said I think we had again a few
selected readings from Richard Dawkins
so it wasn't until I'd read the fabric
of reality that I then read the selfish
Gene and the extended phenotype as well
I thought the extent of phenotype was
particularly good whatever the case
let's keep going let's get into this
really important stuff about the
importance the significance of life
where David really comes with the Crux
of the matter
and he writes quote I now return to the
question whether life is a fundamental
phenomenon of nature I have warned
against the reductionist assumption that
emergent phenomena such as life are
necessarily less fundamental than
microscopic physical ones nevertheless
everything I have just been saying about
what life is seems to point to it being
a mere side effect at the end of a long
chain of side effects for it is not
merely the predictions of biology that
reduce in principle to those of physics
it is on the face of it also the
explanations as I have said the great
explanatory theories of Darwin in modern
versions such as that propounded by
Dawkins and of modern biochemistry ah
reductive living molecules genes Amelia
molecules obeying the same laws of
physics and chemistry as non-living ones
they contain no special substance nor do
they have any special physical
attributes they just happen in certain
environments to be replicators the
property of being a replicator is highly
contextual that is it depends on
intricate details of the replicator's
environment an entity is a replicator in
one environment and not in another also
the property of being adapted to a niche
does not depend on any simple intrinsic
physical attribute that the replicator
has at the time but on effects that it
may cause in the future and under
hypothetical circumstances at that I.E
invariance of the environment contextual
and hypothetical properties are
essentially derivative so it is hard to
see how a phenomenon characterized only
by such properties could possibly be a
fundamental phenomenon of nature end
quote okay so here David is clearly
setting up the argument in strongest
possible terms only to knock it down and
long time listeners to top cast and
certainly readers at the beginning of
infinity will know what's coming next
especially when I read this next short
paragraph you can see how it's all going
to be undone how it's going to have the
wind knocked out of it by the conclusion
that life is of course significant so
what is the argument that life is not
not significant let's keep going David
dry it's close as for the physical
impact of Life the conclusion is the
same the effects of Life seem negligibly
small for all we know the planet Earth
is the only place in the universe where
life exists certainly we have seen no
evidence of its existence elsewhere so
even if it is quite widespread its
effects are too small to be perceptible
to us what we do see beyond the Earth is
an active Universe seething with diverse
powerful but totally inanimate processes
galaxies revolve Stars condense shine
flare explode and collapse high energy
particles and electromagnetic and
gravitational waves stream in all
directions whether life is or is not out
there among all those Titanic processes
seems to make no difference it seems
that none of them would be in the
slightest way affected if life were
present if the Earth were enveloped and
a large solar flare itself an
insignificant event astrophysically our
biosphere would be instantly sterilized
and that catastrophe would have as
little effect on the Sun as a rain
raindrop has on an erupting volcano our
biosphere is in terms of its mass energy
or any similar astrophysical measure of
significance a negligible fraction even
of the earth yet it is a truism of
astronomy that the solar system consists
essentially of the Sun and Jupiter
everything else including the Earth is
just impurities moreover the solar
system is a negligible component of our
galaxy The Milky Way which is itself
unremarkable among the many in the known
universe so it seems that as Stephen
Hawking put it the human race is just a
chemical scum on a moderate sized Planet
orbiting round a very average star in
the outer suburb of one among 100
billion galaxies end quote and of course
we have continued to revise up our
estimates of the number of galaxies in
the universe it went to 200 billion then
it went to a trillion and now I think it
stands at 2 trillion in the observable
universe never mind the rest of the
universe which might go on forever so
these numbers just keep getting larger
and therefore by this argument we keep
getting more insignificant David Goes On
quote thus the prevailing View today is
that life far from being Central either
geometrically theoretically or
practically is of almost inconceivable
insignificance biology in this picture
is a subject with the same status as
geography knowing the layout of the city
of Oxford is important to those of us
who live there but unimportant to those
who never visit Oxford similarly it
seems that life is a property of the
same parochial area or perhaps areas of
the universe fundamental to us because
we are alive but not at all fundamental
either theoretically or practically in
the larger scheme of things but
remarkably this appearance is misleading
it is simply not true that life is
insignificant in its physical effects
nor is it theoretically derivative as a
first step to explaining this let me
explain my earlier remark that life is a
form of virtual reality generation I
have used the word computers for the
mechanisms that execute Gene programs
inside living cells but that is slight
loose terminology compared with the
general purpose computers that we
manufacture artificially they do more in
some respects and less in others one
could not easily program them to do word
processing or to factorize large numbers
on the other hand they exert exquisitely
accurate interactive control over the
responses of a complex environment the
organism to everything that may happen
to it and this control is directed
towards causing the environment to act
back upon the genes in a specific way
namely to replicate them such that the
net effect on the genes is as
independent as possible of what may be
happening outside this is more than just
Computing it is virtual reality
rendering the analogy with the human
technology of virtual reality is not
perfect first although genes are
enveloped just as the user of virtual
reality is in an environment whose
detailed Constitution and behavior are
specified by a program which the genes
themselves embody the genes do not
experience that environment because they
have neither sensors nor experiences so
if an organism is a virtual reality
rendering specified by its genes it is a
rendering without an audience second the
organism is not only being rendered it
is being manufactured it is not a matter
of fooling the genes believing that
there is an organism out there the
organism really is out there however
these differences are unimportant as I
have said all virtual reality rendering
physically manufactures the rendered
environment the inside of any virtual
reality generator in the act of
rendering is precisely a real physical
environment manufactured to have the
property specified in the program it is
just that we users sometimes choose to
interpret it as a different environment
which happens to feel the same as for
the absence of a user let us consider
explicitly what the role of the user of
virtual reality is first it is to kick
the rendered environment and to be
kicked back in return in other words to
interact with the environment in an
autonomous way in the biological case
that role is performed by the external
habitat second it is to provide the
intention behind the rendering that is
to say it makes little sense to speak of
a particular situation as being a
virtual reality rendering if there is no
concept of the rendering being accurate
or inaccurate I have said that the
accuracy of a rendering is the closeness
as perceived by the user of the rendered
environment to the intended one but what
does accuracy mean for a rendering which
no one intended and no one perceives it
means the degree of adaptation of the
genes to their Niche we can infer the
intention of genes to render an
environment that will replicate them
from Darwin's theory of evolution genes
become extinct if they do not enact that
intention as efficiently or resolutely
as other painting genes so living
processes and virtual reality renderings
are superficial differences aside the
same sort of process both involve the
physical embodying of General theories
about an environment in both cases these
theories are used to realize that
environment and to control interactively
not just its instantaneous appearance
but also its detailed response to
General stimuli end quote and we're
about to come to a very beginning of
infinity style Claim about all of this
but you can guess where this is going
it's saying here David is saying here
that the organism is a virtual reality
rendering specified by its chance it's
embodying a theory about the environment
so that the genes can get replicated
what does that mean well David says it
in the very next sentence let me quote
it he says quote genes embody knowledge
about their niches say it again genes
embody knowledge about their niches this
here is the beginning of infinity claim
that we have two kinds of knowledge that
exist in the universe that we know about
so far we have explanatory knowledge
this is the stuff that people are
constructing in order to explain the
universe around them this is our
scientific knowledge and so on and so
forth that arises via conjecture and
refutation of ideas This Is The Stuff
designed by people intelligently
designed by people it's also the stuff
that tends to get itself copied because
it's so useful it solves a problem and
all of that stuff as well this genes and
body knowledge about the niches this is
the biological evolutionary kind of
knowledge in both cases ultimately at
the heart of both of them is this method
of conjecture and criticism but we don't
really know how it is that the knowledge
is created we just know it has something
to do with this process so let me read
what David has to say about this and
we'll call it a day there he's says
going back quote genes embody knowledge
about their niches everything of
fundamental significance about the
phenomenon of life depends on this
property and not on replication per se
so we can now take the discussion Beyond
replicators in principle one could
imagine a species whose genes were
unable to replicate but instead they
were adapted to keep their physical form
unchanged by continual self-maintenance
and by protecting themselves from
external influences such a species is
unlikely to evolve naturally but it
might be constructed artificially just
as the degree of adaptation of a
replicator is defined as the degree to
which it contributes causally to its own
replication we can Define the degree of
adaptation of these non-replicating
genes as a degree to which they
contribute to their own Survival in a
particular form end quote just pausing
there that that's brilliant this is the
idea of knowledge that once instantiated
in a physical substrate tends to cause
itself to remain so it is the thing that
tends to get itself copied there it is
in black and white all the way back in
fabric of reality the degree of
adaptation of a replicator is defined as
the degree to which it contributes
causally to its own replication David
Goes On quote consider a species whose
genes were patterns etched Diamond an
ordinary diamond with a haphazard shape
might survive for elons under a wide
range of circumstances but that shape is
not adapted for survival because a
differently shaped diamond would also
survive under similar circumstances but
if the diamond encoded genes of our
hypothetical species caused the organism
to behave in a way which for instance
protected the diamond's etched surface
from corrosion in a hostile environment
or defended it against other organisms
that would try to etch different
information into it or against thieves
who would cut and polish it into a
gemstone then it would contain genuine
adaptations for survival in those
environments incidentally a gemstone
does have a degree of adaptation for
survival in the environment of
present-day Earth humans seek out uncut
diamonds and change the shapes to those
of gemstones but they seek out those
gemstones and preserve their shape so in
this environment the shape of the
gemstone contributes causally to its own
Survival end quote so there we have the
notion of resilient information okay
resilient information this Chiara maleto
uses this in the size of Cannon cart
another Expo donation of what knowledge
is another way of coming up with
knowledge is which captures this idea
that if you've got a diamond one of the
most resilient of all substances out
there naturally occurring which had
information encoded in it which caused
it to be able to keep thieves away to
stop other information being put onto it
to prevent its own corrosion and so on
and so forth its own erosion well then
you have something interesting something
alive so David goes on to say about
these these Diamond type species quote
when the manufacturer of these
artificial organisms ceased the number
of instances of each non-replicating
gene could never again increase but nor
would it decrease so long as the
knowledge are contained was sufficient
for it to enact its survival strategy
and the niche it occupied eventually a
sufficiently large change in habitat or
attrition caused by accidents might Wipe
Out the species but it might well
survive for as long as many are
naturally occurring species they're
genes of such species share all the
properties of real genes except
replication in particular they embody
the knowledge necessary to render their
organisms in just the way real genes do
it is the survival of knowledge and not
necessarily of the gene or any other
physical object that is the common
factor between replicating and
non-replicating genes so strictly
speaking it is a piece of knowledge
rather than a physical object that is or
is not adapted to a certain Niche if it
is adapted then it has the property that
once it is embodied in that Niche it
will tend to remain so with a replicator
the physical material that embodies it
keeps changing a new copy being
assembled out of non-replicating
components every time replication occurs
non-replicating knowledge may also be
sufficiently embodied in different
physical forms as for example when a
vintage sound recording is transferred
from a vinyl record to a magnetic tape
and later to a compact disc one could
imagine another artificial
non-replicator-based living organism
that did the same sort of thing taking
every opportunity to recopy the
knowledge in its genes onto the safest
medium available perhaps one day our
descendants will do that end quote and
that's where I'll end the reading for
today but there we end it with what's in
the beginning of infinity and now it's
amazing because I read this I don't know
how many times I've read this book but
it's one of those things where I didn't
really get that on the first reading of
the fabric of reality this idea that
it's all there here in this chapter 8
the significance of life this idea that
knowledge is substrate independent so
he's not using the word substrate there
anybody's saying the knowledge can exist
in different physical forms but it's
still the same knowledge and when we're
talking about the evolution of life
where we're saying that it's the genes
that are getting copied really what we
mean it's not the physical molecules it
is the knowledge that those molecules
represent the knowledge is an abstract
thing in theory of course you know you
could in a laboratory read out the
entire genome read out the set of genes
in an organism print it out on a piece
of paper and there it is on the piece of
paper and then recapitulate it into a
new genome so you've transmitted not via
a biological process but some other
court processed call it what you like
however you go about reading and then
printing out stuff and then taking the
print out and using that in the
laboratory to reconstruct the organism
that is taking biological Knowledge from
one place to another through a different
physical media the knowledge is
substrate independent substrate
independent means it doesn't depend on
whatever physical instantiation it has
whatever physical form it has it's the
knowledge the useful information that's
being copied both when we're talking
about evolution by natural selection the
useful information is being copied so
that the genes can survive via a method
of reproduction that goes on between
organisms but causes the replication of
genes but it's the knowledge that's
being copied that's what's going on with
Evolution it's been copied because it's
useful all the genes are useful useful
to want useful to themselves okay useful
to their own Survival and propagation
throughout the environment so we still
haven't quite got admittedly to the
significance of Life the significance of
the life cosmologically speaking but you
can see it's being set up and we already
know here at topcast we already know
that this process that is life is
something that can cause vast changes to
whole planets and ultimately of course
once it is able to transform the surface
of the planet in the form of us human
beings then it can move out into solar
systems galaxies and the rest of the
universe it can be as significant as
what gravity is on the way in which the
universe appears on large scales over
large time frames and over large regions
of space if we could have the God's eye
view of the Multiverse we would see that
it is knowledge the flow of information
that is what is really the big structure
in the verse that what what shapes the
Multiverse as a whole we're not quite
there yet it's coming but we already
have the background knowledge to predict
where it is coming from and next time
we'll get down into the nitty-gritty
into the details
until then bye-bye
[Music]
up
[Applause]
[Music]
foreign